¹ACE Project, <https://aceproject.org/ace-en/topics/es/esf/esf01>.

²Reynolds, A., Reilly, B. and Ellis, A., *Electoral System Design: The New International IDEA Handbook* (Stockholm: International IDEA, 2005).

³Brunell, T. L., *Redistricting and Representation: Why Competitive Elections are bad for America* (New York: Routledge, 2008).

⁴The Ace Encyclopedia, *Boundary Delimitation* (ACE Electoral Knowledge, 2013), http://aceproject.org/ace-en/pdf/bd/view.

⁵Handley, L., *Challenging the Norms and Standards of Election Administration: Boundary Delimitation* (International Foundation for Electoral Systems: Arlington, VA, 2007), pp. 59–74.

⁶Handley, L., *Challenging the Norms and Standards of Election Administration: Boundary Delimitation* (International Foundation for Electoral Systems: Arlington, VA, 2007).

⁷Ace Project, 1998 (www.aceproject.org)

⁸See <https://aceproject.org/main/english/es/esc03.htm>.

⁹See <https://aceproject.org/ace-en/topics/bd/bdc/bdc01/default>.

¹⁰See <https://aceproject.org/ace-en/topics/bd/bdb/bdb05/bdb05a>.

¹¹See https://aceproject.org/ace-en/topics/bd/bdc/bdc01/bdc01c 

¹²See https://aceproject.org/ace-en/topics/bd/bdc/bdc01/default 

¹³See https://aceproject.org/ace-en/topics/bd/bdc/bdc03/bdc03a1 

¹⁴Hariandja, R. Y., ‘Electoral district and regency/municipal DPRD seats increased’, mediaindonesia.com, 18 April 2018.

¹⁵Article 16 of PKPU 16/2017 on Electoral Districting and Seat Allocation for Regency/Municipal DPRD Election.

¹⁶Budiman, A., *Strategy to Realize Elections with Quality and Integrity*, pasca.unej.ac.id, 2015, p.3.

¹⁷Article 4 PKPU 5/2013 on Procedure on Electoral District and Seat Allocation Determination for Provincial DPRD and Regency/Municipal DPRD in the 2014 Elections

¹⁸Ramadhanil et al., *Evaluating the 2019 Concurrent Elections: From Election System to Election Management* (Jakarta: Association for Elections and Democracy, 2019).

¹⁹The German higher assembly, the Bundesrat, has its members appointed by the states or Länder

²⁰ACE Project, ‘Germany: Delimiting Districts in a Mixed Member Proportional Electoral System’.

²¹German Federal Ministry of the Interior, Building, and Community, ‘the Voting System’.

²²*Germany Federal Elections Act*, as amended on 3 June 2021.

²³ACE Project, ‘Germany: Delimiting Districts in a Mixed Member Proportional Electoral System’.

²⁴ACE Project, ‘Germany: Delimiting Districts in a Mixed Member Proportional Electoral System’.

²⁵The Representation Commission has seven members. Four are *ex-officio* members of public service institutions: the general surveyor, government statistics expert, election official lead and head of the Regional Government Commission. Two members are appointed by the Governor-General following nomination by parliament: one represents the government party (but has no voting right on the Commission) and another represents the largest opposition party. The seventh member is nominated by other members and appointed by the Governor-General. This seventh member is the chairperson of the Commission. Since the Representation Commission was formed in 1956, the chairperson has always been from the judiciary (ACE Project). 

²⁶New Zealand EMB, ‘Redrawing of Electorate Boundaries soon to get underway’, Press release, 1 October 2013.

²⁷To create the Māori electoral districts, the Representation Commission is given three extra members: the *ex officio* Executive Head of the Ministry of Māori Development and two additional members appointed by the Governor-General who are both Māori. These three members join the Commission to provide a perspective on the interests of the Māori community (ACE Project).

²⁸New Zealand Parliament, 8 June 2017, *The Electoral System*.

²⁹ACE Project, ‘New Zealand: Drawing Electoral Districts to Guarantee Minority Representation’.

³⁰ACE Project, ‘New Zealand: Drawing Electoral Districts to Guarantee Minority Representation’. 

³¹The total population based on the latest population census will be reduced by the number of Māori citizens. The Māori population is obtained from the ratio of Māori voters to the total voter count. The government statistician then inputs the proportion to the number of people who claim to be of Māori descent in the latest population census. To determine the number of seats allocated to Māori electoral districts, the number of voters in the South Island is divided by the quota of 16 seats for the South Island (ACE Project).

³²Handley, L., *Challenging the Norms and Standards of Election Administration: Boundary Delimitation*, hlm.62, publikasi IFES, 2007.

³³ACE Project, ‘New Zealand: Drawing Electoral Districts to Guarantee Minority Representation’.

³⁴The Federal Constitution of Malaysia states that parliamentary elections should be held at least once every five years. Elections have been held every five years since Malaysian independence in 1957 (ACE Project).

³⁵For the purposes of parliamentary electoral district assessment, the federal regions of Kuala Lumpur, Labuan and Putrajaya are treated as states (Malaysian Federal Constitution).

³⁶Under the federal constitution, two measurements are used to assess the proportionality of district magnitude and seat allocation: election quotas and citizen quotas. Election quotas are obtained by dividing the number of voters in a federal region or state by the number of total electoral districts, or, if possible, the number of electoral districts in that state. Citizen quotas are obtained by dividing the population of the federal region or state by the total number of electoral districts, or, depending on the situation, the number of electoral districts in that state.

³⁷The Election Commission has seven members. All the members are appointed by the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (King) in consultation with the Conference of Rulers, a council of the nine rulers of the Malay states and the governors of the four remaining states. All seven members can sit on the Election Commission until they retire at 65, and can be removed from office only by a special court set up by the prime minister.
