At the end of World War II, the Federal Republic of Germany adopted the mixed member proportional (MMP) system for elections to the Federal lower assembly or Bundestag.¹⁹ This electoral system requires single-member districts and the multi-member (PR) districts. The multi-member districts are expected to compensate for the disproportionality of the single-member districts.²⁰

Multi-member districts are only implemented in the state-level elections. Each state needs more than one representative to represent its diverse political interests. If state elections only used single-member districts, the larger parties in that state would dominate all the seats in every electoral district. At the federal level, under the MMP system, half the Bundestag members are elected directly from single-member districts and the other half from multi-member districts. There are 299 seats in the Bundestag.²¹

Electoral districts in Germany are formed by a permanent Electoral District Commission, or Wahlkreiskommission. The commission comprises the President of the Federal Statistics Bureau, a judge from the Federal Administrative Court and five additional members, usually senior administrative officials from the states. The Commission is set up by the President of the Federal Republic at the start of a parliamentary term. The Commission is tasked with reporting changes to the number of citizens in every electoral district and submitting recommendations on how to conduct electoral redistricting by accommodating the changes in the population count.²²

Five rules on electoral districting must be followed by the Electoral District Commission based on article 3 of the Federal Election Law of 27 April 2001:

1. State boundaries must be observed;
2. The number of electoral districts in each state that implements multi-member districts must be proportionate to the population;
3. The population count of one new electoral district cannot be more than 15 percent above the average population of all electoral districts. Existing electoral districts that exceed the average population quota by more than 25% must be redrawn;
4. Each electoral district must form a coherent whole; and
5. If possible, commune, district and urban district boundaries must be respected.

In the process of assessing and creating electoral districts, the Commission must invite input from the Federal Ministry of Home Affairs and state governments. Each state has an opportunity to present its response to the Commission’s recommendations.²³

The Commission has 15 months after the start of a Bundestag term to complete a report and submit it to the Federal Ministry of Home Affairs. The report is then passed to the Bundestag. The Commission report includes the number of voters in each electoral district as well as recommendations for electoral district reallocation and electoral district boundary modifications. The Commission can propose several alternative plans for expanding electoral districts, so that the Bundestag has more than one option to determine the new electoral districts. The Bundestag will also decide whether the electoral districts are to be changed or maintained. The Bundestag is not obliged to accept any electoral districting proposal from the Commission. It often decides not to change electoral districts unless the population of one electoral district is 33 percent larger than the average size of all electoral districts.²⁴
