Electoral districting in New Zealand is the sole task of an independent Representation Commission.²⁵ Electoral redistricting is done every five years following a citizen census.²⁶ Generally, electoral districts are determined based on population size, but the Māori district²⁷ has been separate from the general electoral districts since 1867. However, since the mixed member proportional (MMP) system was implemented in 1993, the number of electoral districts in Māori regions has been calculated by the same method as that used for the general electoral districts.²⁸

In electoral districting, no electoral district can vary by more than five per cent of the electoral district quota. In addition, based on sections 35(f) and 45(6) of the 1993 Election Law, electoral districting must consider five factors: (a) existing electoral district boundaries; (b) communities of interest, including factors such as tribal affiliation for Māori electoral districts; (c) communications facilities; (d) Topographical conditions; and (e) projections of voter number increases in the next five years.²⁹

There are ten steps in the electoral districting process in New Zealand:³⁰

1.	Population numbers and spread are obtained from the five-yearly citizen census. Data analysis can take up to one year following the census.
2.	Electoral districting for Māori regions is carried out over four months, starting immediately after the census. Citizens of Māori descent are given the choice whether to register on a general voter list or a Māori voter list. 
3.	The data from the general population census and Māori voter data are combined to allow a government statistician to calculate the number of voters in the North Island and the South Island, the number of general voters that the North Island is entitled to, the number of Māori voters and the number of electoral districts.³¹
4.	The general surveyor distributes the general population and Māori data in all electoral districts using a small statistical unit called a street block. Each street block usually consists of up to 200 persons. Several sets of “temporary” electoral district alternatives are created using these street blocks as the basic building blocks.
5.	The general surveyor gathers the Representative Commission and provides it with the temporary electoral district boundaries. The Representation Committee has six months from the first formal meeting to complete its work and publish a final design for the electoral districts.
6.	Before starting its detailed assessment, the Representation Commission invites the political parties in parliament and all independent MPs to make proposals. As the electoral district designs are still secret at this stage, the proposals tend to focus on how the electoral districting regulations should be interpreted based on each stakeholder’s perspective.
7.	After the proposals have been submitted, the Representation Commission checks the electoral district designs and changes them where necessary. Even though the electoral district designs are still kept secret at this stage, politically appointees are allowed to discuss the designs with a small number of people in the party they represent as the Commission develops the proposed electoral districts.
8.	The electoral district map designed by the Commission is published together with a summary of the reasons behind the Commission’s preliminary decision. The public is given time to comment on the electoral district designs, and individuals or organizations have one month to reject the proposed electoral district and recommend an alternative electoral district design. The Representation Commission then issues a summary of all the objections received. The public then has two weeks to file counter-objections.
9.	After the counter-objection period has closed, a public hearing is held in locations where there have been many objections to the electoral district design, usually in regions with large populations.
10.	The electoral district designs proposed by the Commission are then reconsidered in relation to the objections and counter-objections, and the definitive number of voters is determined. A detailed voter map covering all states and legal descriptions of voters is prepared together with the Commission’s report. Publication of the report marks the conclusion of the electoral redistricting process, and the established electoral districts can no longer be changed or challenged in court.³²

Before 1998, the electoral redistricting process was carried out manually by drawing district boundaries on a paper map and counting the number of voters. Since then, however, all members of the Representative Commission have been provided with laptop computers and a GIS software, citizenship statistics, electoral district boundaries and administrative boundaries. Members of the Commission can use the GIS software to develop various options interactively and obtain direct feedback on the impact of changes. Electoral districting technology makes electoral districting more effective and provides a stronger basis for electoral districting that is in line with the legal criteria.³³