Single-member district systems require a time-consuming and potentially expensive process of drawing boundaries for relatively small constituencies. The way in which they are demarcated will depend on issues such as population size, cohesiveness, transportation and communications networks, ‘communities of interest’ and contiguity. This is rarely a one-off task as boundaries have to be adjusted regularly to take population change into account. First-Past-the-Post (FPTP), Alternative Vote (AV) and Two-round systems produce the most administrative problems on this score. The Block Vote (BV), Party Block Vote (PBV), Single Non-Transferrable Vote (SNTV), Limited Vote (LV) and Single Transferrable Vote (STV) systems also require electoral districts to be demarcated but are somewhat easier to manage because they use multi-member districts, which are larger and therefore fewer in number. Drawing districts for the majoritarian element of a mixed system poses similar challenges.

Where multi-member districts are used, it is possible to avoid the need to adjust boundaries by changing the number of representatives elected from each electoral district instead. This is a method of particular value when established units such as provinces are used as electoral districts. List PR systems are often the cheapest and easiest to administer because they use either a single national constituency, which means that no boundaries need be drawn at all, or very large multi-member districts that dovetail with pre-existing state or provincial boundaries. The UN-sponsored elections in Sierra Leone in 1996, Liberia in 1997 and Kosovo in 2001 were all conducted under a national List PR system, partly because the displacement of people and the lack of accurate census data meant that electoral authorities did not have the population data required to draw smaller districts.¹