In Europe for much of the 20th century, the legislature was responsible for the drawing of district boundaries. To this day, there are no independent boundary commissions in the United States.

Among the countries in which the legislature is still responsible for boundary delimitation are countries with List PR electoral systems. The legislatures in these countries, such as Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Finland, Iceland and Sweden, originally defined a set of electoral district—often multi-member—boundaries in their constitution or electoral law. These constituencies have remained in place for subsequent elections, although the number of seats assigned to each multimember constituency has varied over time depending on population size.

A second set of countries in which the legislature plays a role in the delimitation process is those with mixed electoral systems, such as Italy, South Korea, Kyrgyzstan and Panama. The constituency boundaries in these countries are of less political consequence than those with a FPTP electoral system because a separate set of legislative seats is filled by proportional representation. Elections in mixed systems usually produce outcomes that are more proportional than FPTP systems.

The United States is one of the very few democracies where the election of legislators is based solely on single-member constituencies that allows the (state) legislatures a dominant role in the delimitation process. The consequence of this approach is that partisan politics plays a very large—and often quite explicit—role in the redistricting process. For example, on several occasions when a redistricting plan was challenged in court on the grounds that the plan constituted racial gerrymandering, defendants claimed that politics, and not race, was the motivating factor behind the plan, and thus the plan was neither illegal nor unconstitutional.

Legislators from the majority political party are often tempted to draw redistricting plans that favour their own candidates at the expense of candidates from other parties. The redistricting, process has come under increasing attack for political bias because of this practice.
