A majority of the countries that delimit electoral districts have established a mandatory time interval within which redistricting of existing boundaries must occur. Although there is no standard time period, the range of intervals for delimitation is not particularly.⁷ The Seychelles requires the delimitation of new constituency boundaries every three years, if certain conditions are met, Malaysia every eight years and France only every 12 to 14 years.

The most common periodic delimitation appears to be ten years: Botswana, Canada, India (although amendments to the Constitution cancelled the delimitations following the 1981 and 1991 censuses and delayed the exercise following the 2011 census), Japan, Kenya, Lesotho, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Tanzania, the United States and Yemen all have electoral laws or constitutional provisions that require delimitation at least every 10 years. (In the case of Botswana, the requirement is every five to ten years; Kenyan law dictates that delimitation occur every eight to ten years.)

Albania, the Bahamas, Fiji, New Zealand, Turkey and Zimbabwe redraw their electoral districts every five years. Australia delimits at least every seven years. Ireland is required to delimit multimember constituencies for its STV electoral system every 12 years and the United Kingdom also permits up to 12 years to elapse before completing a constituency boundary review.

Establishing a mandatory time interval does not necessarily mean that redistricting will occur. After delimiting constituencies in 1973, India placed a moratorium on delimitation until after 2000, despite a legal provision that requires redistricting after every census (see above).

No specific time interval has been established in about one-third of the countries that delimit electoral districts. Common triggers for delimitation other than a specific time frame are a national census, a change in the number of seats apportioned to an area, changes in administrative boundaries and reaching a prescribed level of malapportionment. For example, in Macedonia, if the degree of malapportionment exceeds 3 per cent, delimitation must occur. In the Czech Republic, the prescribed level of malapportionment that prompts a delimitation exercise is 15 percent, while in Germany the trigger is 25 percent.

The disadvantage of infrequent redistricting is the wide discrepancies in district populations that often result over time. Districts that are drawn with very small population deviations at the beginning of a decade, for instance, can vary considerably by the end of that decade.

Australia has adopted a unique solution to this problem. Rather than using current enrolment figures, federal electoral districts are redrawn using projections, so that the number of electors enrolled in each district will be equal in three and a half years, the mid-point of Australia's seven-year redistricting cycle.
