The number of parliamentary seats is a basic element of boundary delimitation. Electoral districts cannot be formed before the number of parliamentary seats is known as this number will determine the number of parliamentary seats allocated to each of the regions that will become the electoral districts. There are two models for determining the number of parliamentary seats: first, this can be determined directly by the constitution or legislation, such as in the United States, where the number of seats in the House of Representatives and the Senate is determined by the US Constitution. Second, it can be calculated by a formula that uses the population as a variable. This formula is known as the cube-root relationship between population and assembly size. The Electoral Knowledge Network (ACE Project) provides three formulas for calculating an appropriate number of parliamentary seats.⁸

- S = P1/3
- Pa = PLW
- S = (2Pa) 1/3

Key: 

- S is the number of parliamentary seats;
- P is the population size; 
- L is the literacy rate;
- W is the proportion of the total population that is of working age.

In practice, the process of determining the number of parliamentary seats does not always follow the above formulas. According to ACE Project data, out of 111 countries, only Norway’s parliamentary seat number is in line with the cube root rule calculation. For example, India has a population of more than one million, and should therefore ideally have 1054 parliamentary seats. In reality, however, the Indian *Lok Shaba* (lower house) has only 552 seats. Similarly, the US House of Representatives should ideally have 675 seats, but the Constitution determines the number of seats to be 436. 

The parliamentary seat number is then apportioned to regions or areas in proportion to each area’s population in order to form electoral districts. For example, if an electoral district is required for a national legislative election, the number of national legislative seats will be apportioned to the regions (provinces or states) in proportion to the population of each region. 

The apportionment process is conducted by proportionally converting the number of citizens or voters in the regions that will become electoral districts for legislative elections. A formula is commonly used to convert votes to seats. However, in the context of forming electoral districts, the variable used in the calculation is not voter turnout, but the number of citizens or voters in a region. The formula for calculating seat apportionment for electoral districting can follow various variants of the electoral formulas commonly used in PR electoral systems. 
