Population size is a key element in electoral districting. How many seats are allocated to an electoral district is highly dependent on the size of the population in the area or region. Seat apportionment to electoral districts is done by proportionally converting the base population number to seats using the electoral formula. 

Two types of population data are used in the apportionment process for electoral districting: total population of all ages or the number of residents of voting age. Most countries use the total population as the basis for allocating seats in electoral districting. The United States and Germany, for example, use census data to allocate seats to electoral districts. Since 1975, the US Census Bureau has been tasked with providing population data to each state in order to form electoral districts. This population data comprises total population, voting age population, and disaggregated totals for the number for Hispanic citizens and five main race groups: white, black, Asian and Pacific Islander, American Indian, Eskimo, Aleut and “other”.⁹

Countries that use total population to form electoral districts probably rely on population data that includes non-citizens, those under voting age and citizens who not eligible to vote for other reasons. Many other countries, such as those that implement compulsory voting (e.g., Australia), use the number of residents with voting rights (voters) to apportion seats to electoral districts. The calculation variable to determine the number of seats in an electoral district in such cases is therefore the number of voters. The Australia Election Commission, for example, formulates the calculation for electoral redistricting as: 

(number of electors enrolled in a state or territory **/** number of members the state/territory is entitled to) **=** Current enrolment quota 