To maintain proportionality or seat allocation equity, it is important to determine a population deviation standard in order to remain as close to the principle of ‘one person; one vote; one value’ denoted by the population quota. Such a standard is usually presented as a percentage. A permissible **25% deviation** from the population quota for total seats in a district, **for example, 5.75 – 6.25 for a 6-member district, allows a ‘swing’ of half of one quota. In this example, the “maximum allowable deviation” is 25%.** Various population deviation standards have been set around the world: 

- **0% to 1%** : In *Karcher v. Daggett* in 1983, the US Supreme Court held that there is no point at which population deviations in a congressional redistricting plan can be considered inconsequential: “there are no *de minimus* variations which could practically be avoided but which nonetheless meet the standard of Article I, Section 2 [of the US Constitution] without justification.
- **3% to 10%** : Macedonia specifies plus or minus 3%; New Zealand, Albania and Yemen 5%; and Australia, Belarus, Italy and Ukraine 10% as the maximum allowable deviation.
- **15%** : Armenia, Germany and the Czech Republic allow population deviations of no more than 15 percent. (In Germany, new electoral districts cannot deviate by more than 15 percent, and existing districts that deviate by more than 25 percent trigger redelimitation.) 
- **Greater than 15%** : Zimbabwe and Papua New Guinea have set the maximum allowable deviation at 20 percent. In Canada, the independent commissions charged with creating federal electoral districts are allowed to deviate by up to 25 percent from the provincial quotas. Since 1986, however, these commissions have been permitted to exceed the 25 percent limit under ‘extraordinary circumstances’.¹⁰ 
