The first step is to examine the electoral legal framework and related regulations that govern electoral districting. Various questions surround the legal framework on boundary delimitation: 

> a. What is the electoral law on the number of legislative seats both nationally and locally? It is important to know the number of parliamentary seats upfront, as this number will later be apportioned to the electoral districts.

> b. Does the electoral law framework require political/administrative subdivisions as the building blocks for delimitation? For example, for a national legislative election, the regions permitted to become electoral districts are provinces or states, while for local legislative elections at the provincial or state level the districts are cities in that area. 

> c. Does the electoral legal framework specify the data sources for the population number or voter number used in the process of seat apportionment? 

> d. Does the electoral legal framework set specific criteria on which regional boundaries are allowed or not allowed to be formed into electoral districts? (Such as road access, infrastructure or communication networks that connect the regions, rivers or mountains, and ensuring the contiguity and compactness of the region.) 

> e. Does the electoral legal framework set minimum or maximum limits on the number of seats to be allocated to an electoral district? In Indonesia, for example, one electoral district must have at least three seats and no more than 10. 

> f. Does the electoral legal framework set time intervals for seat reallocation or electoral redistricting? (For example, following the cycle for the national census.) 
